They were seen on the most significant
missions like Apollo, Skylab and the
Space Shuttle. They've been used for the
SpaceX Falcon Heavy and they'll be there
on the upcoming SLS missions but they're
hardly ever talked about and without
them who simply wouldn't be able to get
the rockets off the ground, what are they?
they were the gateway to the moon
and the starting point for every space
shuttle mission. NASA launch pads 39a and
39b so what do these massive feats of
engineering do and just how important
are they.
NASA has over 40 launch pads in various
locations from the US mainland to the
Pacific. Their position chosen to best
get the spacecraft to the correct orbit
and to be safely away from population
centers. Cape Canaveral in Florida is
better for launching spacecraft
requiring a west-east orbit and others
like Vandenberg in California are
preferred for spacecraft requiring a
north/south orbit but wherever they are
the launch pads themselves are vitally
important pieces of equipment for first
and foremost holding the rocket
vertically which is no mean feat when
you consider the size of a Saturn 5
which at launch weighed 2938 tons and
stood 17.6 meters taller
than the Statue of Liberty at a 110 meters the same as a 36
story building. The launch complex at
Cape Canaveral started its rocket career
in 1948 after the Naval Air Station
there was transferred from the Navy to
the Air Force for testing of captured
German V2 rockets. This went on to
missile testing and rocket technology
throughout the 1950s until NASA was
formed in 1958 and it became the future
for manned and unmanned missions
including project mercury and Gemini. In
1961 when President Kennedy announced
the moon missions Cape Canaveral was
chosen to be the base for Apollo this
also meant that it would need a massive
expansion with NASA taking an extra 550
square kilometers of
land and the launch complex 39 would be
designed to handle the most powerful
rocket yet designed of a Saturn V.
Work started in 1962 and was completed
by 1965 there were to be three launch
pad 39A, B and C and in two more D and E
later. In the end only two ended up being
built named 39A and in just north of
that 39B.
Because the area is just above sea level
the flame trenches could not be placed
below ground level due to the water
table being very close to the surface so
the launch pads were raised by 13 meters
and look like concrete hills. Because of
the way NASA designed by Saturn V  there
was no permanent launch umbilical tower
at the launch pad. That's the part which
is next to the rocket to take off and
supplies it with fuel electrical power
and access for the crew. Instead the
tower was integrated into a mobile
launcher platform. The Saturn V would be
assembled directly onto the platform
along with the tower. This was part of
NASA's Assembly schedule that meant that
the rocket was assembled vertically and
then moved with its tower to the launch
pad. This contrasts with the Soviets
which assembled their rockets as they
lay on their side and then moved them to
the launch pad horizontally where they
were then lifted into the vertical
position before launch. Now you may well
ask why did NASA choose a vertical
integration and the Soviets horizontal.
Well when the Saturn was being designed
it was thought that even bigger rockets
like the Nova would follow. NASA
concluded that it would be easier to
assemble the rocket vertically directly
onto a mobile launch platform and then
move the whole thing to the launch area
rather than assembling it and then
moving it on its side and then lifting
it up at the launch pad. This was because
they thought that the engineering
challenges of lifting a 110 meter or
larger rocket were just not worth it and
but it would place too much stress on
the rockets body. Now some of you will be
saying that a Soviet N1 was almost as
big as the Saturn 5 and that was built
horizontally and cranked up to the
vertical position but it required a huge
complex mobile structure to lift it and
it was moved on to parallel railway
lines with two locomotives. Building the
Saturn vertically required the largest
single storey building in the world
the VAB or the Vehicle Assembly Building
which at a 160 meters tall
is where the new SLS rocket will also be
assembled. Built between 1962 and 65 the
VAB was capable of preparing up to four
Saturn V's at the same time and each
of the four doors are the largest in the
world to allow a complete Saturn rocket
assembly to go out to the launch pad. For
Apollo the pre-built sections of a
Saturn 5 were delivered to the Vehicle
Assembly Building from around the US.
Here they were stacked on top of each
other to form the rocket. On the Saturn 5
the rocket was held down to the launch
platform by massive hold down arms which would release at launch whereas the
shuttle was bolted to the platform
through the solid rocket boosters using
frangible nuts,
these are nuts which are explosively
split at liftoff rather than using
explosive bolts. In order to get the
rocket and the mobile launcher platform
from the VAB to the launch area there
were two crawler transporters which
drive under the mobile launch platform
lifted up and then move it to the launch
complex. When these 2700
ton vehicles were delivered in
1965 for the Apollo program they were
the largest self powered land vehicles
in the world. Not only do they carry the
rocket and the mobile launcher at about
1.6 kilometers per hour they also keep a
whole assembly level as he ascends the
3%
ramp to the launch pad 39A and B. It's
laser-guided leveling system could keep
the top of a Saturn V within 30
centimeters vertically of the base.
Once the mobile launch platform had
reached the launch pad it was set down
and the crawler transporter returned to
the Vehicle Assembly Building and no it
didn't need to do a massive three-point
turn it could be driven from either end
so it just returned the way came.
Even the road that connects the VAB to
the launch pad known as the crawlerway
had to be specially built with a very
low friction surface due to the weight
of the rocket the launcher platform and
the crawler which came in at some 8,165 tons. The material chosen was Alabama
River gravel for its unique combination
of qualities and it's still in use today.
With the Apollo launches the Saturn 5
was attached of a launcher platform and
the launch umbilical tower or LUT.
Although it looks like the tower is
holding the Saturn up that was done with
hold down arms at the base of a rocket.
The tower was actually there to supply
fuel electrical power and crew access
via the nine service arms which can be
seen swinging away from the rocket at
launch. At the top of the LUT
was the crew access walkway and the
white room from which the crews would
then enter the command module. The pad
leader for every manned Apollo mission
was Guenter Wendt. He would perform the
final checks, strapped for crew into the
capsule, shake their hands and offer
words of support and then close the
hatch. The last major piece of
infrastructure was mobile service
structure or the MSS. This was a large
lattice like platform which has also
moved around by the crawlers. At the top
of this which was a little shorter than
the launch Tower was a section that would
completely enclosed the top of the
Saturn 5 and the command module to
provide weather protection and access
for technicians as well as a cleanroom
for preparations before the flight. The
mobile service structure was also used
to place the linear explosive charges
that would separate the stages in flight
and charges along the fuel and
oxidizer tanks for "fuel dispersion" in
the event that the rocket had to be
destroyed if it veered off course during
the launch. The MSS would be moved away
from a Saturn 8 hours before the launch
and was parked between pads 39 a and B
on the crawl away when not in use.
One of the other jobs that the launcher
platform had to do when it was in
position was to precisely match up with
the pipe work for the fuel and
electrical supply system which can be
seen running up the side of the LUT.
The fuel which for Saturn 5 youth was RP-1, a highly refined version of kerosene
and LOX or liquid oxygen. This was used
for the first stage and liquid hydrogen
and liquid oxygen were used for the
second and third stages. This was pumped
aboard whilst the Saturn was at the
launch pad. Other hypergolic fuels those
that combust on contact with each other
were also pumped aboard at this time and
used for the ignition of the F-1 engines and
for the lunar landers descent and ascent
engines. In the event of a problem like a
major fuel leak whilst the Saturn was
being prepared and providing but it
didn't just blow up on a spot
technicians and crews were trained in an
escape procedure that used a special
high-speed elevator that would get them
from the top of the tower to the
launch platform in under 30 seconds. From
here they would then slide down a 61
meet a deceleration slide to the rubber
room some 12 meters under the launch pad
and so-called because it was lined with
rubber as a shock absorber. This anti
chamber led via a 15 centimeter thick
steel blast door to a dome-shaped blast
proof room mounted on giant springs that
was designed to withstand the explosion
of a fully fueled saturn v on the launch
pad above. This room could hold up to 20
people with enough food and water and an
air filtration system for 24 hours. Each
of the seats could hold a fully suited
astronaut until such time it was
safe to leave a room via an escape
tunnel but emerged some 366 meters away
from the pad. Now the launch platform
under the rocket was not a flat surface
it had a 13.7 meter
square blast shielded hole for the
rocket exhaust which allowed it to pass
down and over the flame deflector. This
double-sided ramp was there to deflect
the exhaust and stop it from coming back
up and enveloping the rocket. The 13
meter high ramp which was covered in
flames probe concrete and mounted on
rails so could be more easily replaced,
deflected the exhaust down to 18 meter
wide flame trenches which stretched a
174 meters and were
also made from concrete and lined with
refractory bricks to protect it from a
heat. The huge amount of smoke seen at the
launch isn't just rocket exhaust, it's
mostly water from the deluge system
flashing to steam from the heat of the
exhaust. The water was pumped onto the
launch pad just before takeoff to help
protect the platform and act as an
acoustic dampener. In 1974 launch pad 39a was decommissioned and was reconfigured
for the space shuttle the same also
happened to pad 39b in 1977. The reason for
the three-year gap was just in case
Congress changed its mind and decided to
reinstate the Apollo program. Pad 39B
wouldn't be used for the shuttle until
1986 when its first mission was for the
ill-fated Challenger STS-51. After the
Apollo missions the mobile launcher
platforms were also redesigned for the
shuttles. The launch umbilical Tower was
removed and a permanent two-piece access
tower system the fixed service structure
the FSS and the rotating service
structure the RSS were built at the
launch pad 39A and B. This new structure
also replaced the old mobile service
structure. Some of the old structures
were preserved in particular the white
room from launch pad 39a which is now at
the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Center.
Now just the shuttle stack, that's the
shuttle, the SRBs and the external fuel
tank would be carried on
launcher platform. The platform was also
modified for the solid rocket boosters
and the exhaust bays were expanded and
the flame deflectors were also replaced.
As the shuttle was being tested it
became clear that huge acoustic
shockwaves were bouncing off the launch
platform and could endanger both crew
and the delicate insulation tiles of the
shuttle. This also occurred during the
Apollo launches too but the Saturn was
also much higher up and further away
from the engines and the Saturn didn't
have any delicate heat-resistant tiles
either. So a new expanded deluge system
was also added. This was supplied by a 90
meter high water tower which held 1.1
million litres of water and ran through
twin 2 meter wide pipes  to 16 nozzles that
sprayed the water over the launch
platform onto the flame deflector. The
deluge system will be activated six
seconds prior to liftoff would emptied the
1.1 million liters of water in around 41
seconds and reduced for sound level by
half to about a 142db.
With these massive metal
structures like the Apollo launch tower
and the Saturn rocket itself there was
the ever-present danger of lightning
strikes hitting a fully fueled rocket or
causing electronic failures. To mitigate
against this the apollo launch tower used a lightning conductor on the top of
the tower. This provided a cone of
protection for the vehicle and the
equipment within it but the Lightning
could be still quite close to sensitive
electronics. When the shuttle came into
service the electronics had shrunk in size
but also became more sensitive so the
Lightning conductor was attached to two
catenary wires to direct the electrical
discharge further away. For the now
canceled constellation program it was
upgraded once more to the "rolling
spheres" system. Here three 150 meter
towers are topped with 17 meter
fiberglass insulators and linked
together with multiple
catenary wires around the launchpad
which keeps the lightning much further
away. After the cancellation of a
constellation program in 2010 and the
final flight of a space shuttle in 2011
the future of Launchpad complex 39 was
in doubt. So in 2013 NASA allowed bidding
for the first commercial flights from
pad 39a and a 20-year lease was awarded
to SpaceX for the exclusive use of a
launch pad.
Unlike Apollo and shuttle SpaceX Rockets
were built horizontally and then lifted
up at the launch pad so a new horizontal
integration facility was built at pad
39A. Pad 39B will be used for the SLS
system and that will use the same
vertical integration method first used
in the Saturn V and when it's not in use
for the SLS, 39b
will be available for other commercial
launches. In 2015 a new launch pad called
39C was built and that's for use with
smaller launch vehicles. They're also
plans for two more launch complexes LC
48 and LC 49 as the market for
commercial space increases and for use
with other rockets like the Blue Origin
new Glen. So what's your thoughts about
America's gateway to space
maybe you've worked there or maybe
witnessed some of the launches, let me
know in the comments below, so don't
forget to check out some of our other
space related videos and please
subscribe, thumbs up and share.
you